Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbivill. Gary Banta has lived in
the Brasis Valley since 1982. He was born in Brownfield, Texas, grew up in Kansas, and
after high school and working for a time, he joined the Army in 1967. That was well into
the Vietnam War. That's where he both drove and rode shotgun on truck con voice, delivering
supplies to the hot spots where choppers and aircraft could not land. Yes, it was a
year or two or it was quite dangerous, but he survived it without any serious wounds. He
will talk to us about his time in Vietnam. And then later his duty at Fort Knox, where
he indeed saw the gold. And later as a chaplain's assistant in Germany. And he's here to talk
proudly about the work of the American Legion, Earl Graham post 159 of which he is now
the commander. Please welcome Gary Banta to Veterans of the Valley. Gary, it is pleasure
to have you here and thank you for your service. And especially to the American Legion, which
we're going to talk about a lot here in a little bit. But let's talk about sort of you,
you were born in Texas, you grew up in Kansas, and it won long after high school after working
for a while that you decided to join the Army. Sort of talk about that transition from
boyhood into the Army. Well, I grew up in cold water, Kansas, and after high school
moved back to Texas and went to work on road job at Lake Meredith, that post-aborder.
And it was awfully cold, so in Vietnam war was on and at that time it had not become
unpopular. So I felt like I wanted to go in the military and so I joined and was sent
to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri for basic training and then on to other duties.
Yeah, you told me you, I guess you joined up in Amarillo and well most of the people were
sent to Fort Bliss where it was warm. You couldn't get out of the cold, right? You were
sent to Missouri. I've been working in ice and cold and up there in Amarillo and thought
I'd try to go to Bliss to get basic and they sent me to Fort Leonard Wood.
Having a vehicle operator, that's what you were trained in, but you never really did that
until you got to Vietnam. And let's go ahead and talk about that because we've got a lot
to talk about today. April 1st, April Fool's Day of 1968 was the day that you went in
country. Talk about your first tour of duty in Vietnam and being on a convoy and sort
of what all that involved.
Okay, I landed at Cameron Bay, it was a reception center for income and people coming to
Vietnam and there were a number of them but that's where I went and I stayed there for
a day or two until I found out what unit I would be going to and then went to the
name.
And it was a sign for a short period of time with an organics company and what I wasn't
there but just a few weeks and then on up across up into the northern part of Vietnam
in the I-Core with the 1st Air Cavalry Division, 101st Airborne, Missouri, 25th Army Cavalry.
This is in Fubai, northern part of Vietnam. Fubai is a southern suburb of Hawaii, the
Citadel city and that battle had been going on and was just ending when I got there.
Right.
And for the rest of your duty, you ran convoy's. That was your job. But once you talk about
that a little bit more specifically, talk about what that involved. You drove some but
mostly you would ride shotgun with an M60. And so talk about the need for convoy's,
talk about the effect of convoy's, what it did and this brought on pretty dicey situations
for us.
Sure did. A convoy's, the supply depot was at a place called Tan Mai. It was a deep water
pier at the mouth of the Perfume River. The Perfume River runs through Hawaii but at the
mouth of that river is a deep water pier. And everything that came into Vietnam came
in through that deep water pier. All the supplies. All kinds of supplies. Every kind of thing
you could imagine all the way from bullets to biscuits, you know, whatever came in came
in there. And I would say the majority of the time we were hauling just the everyday
things of life, right, trying to provide even plywood and things like that. But during
the times when it got really serious, we were hauling ammunition, powder, rockets, every
kind of thing you can imagine in support of these fire bases, right. And that's where
the bad part of my exercise, not that that was all of it because we got murdered in
early every night or rockets or something every night. But those convoy's where we would
go out to that Tan Mai and pick up those loads of ammunition or whatever we were taken
in land. And those were usually night-con boys running night. And I don't know if you know
how that works, but there are no lights. All you have is on the rear of the vehicle in
front of you are two triangles about the size of a dime. And when they light up red that
breaks you're on when they're white, he's running. And that's all you've got to look at.
And it's terrifying because in the middle of that, you're going to get shot at. Right.
What's going to happen? And the thing that you most feared is being stopped. Stop.
Because the VC would stop you by any means necessary whether it would be roadside mine
or our grenade launcher or a truck or whatever. RPGs. And that happened. It did. It did
happen. It did happen. And generally you would dismount and take you, mm-60 off the truck,
the driver and the gunner get underneath the engine block of the truck. And we did that
several times. Right. And prepared to defend the position. Yeah. I guess probably not
much different than what goes on. But we didn't see any IEDs. Right. Wasn't any of that.
Right. Now these were five and a half ton trucks, right? Five ton, five ton trucks. And
we had in the con boys, especially those that were loaded with ammunition, we would have
a five ton truck that had inch plate steel on it. And in the back of that was a quad 50.
That's four 50 caliber machine guns electrically operated. There would be three of those in the
con boy, then jeeps that moved all through the con boy with two M60s on them. So we had
a lot of firepower. Right. But sometimes you needed it. Right. You know.
August of 1968, you talked about one operation called Massachusetts Stryker. That's right.
That was probably the, there were several weeks there that I, you know, I don't even really
remember. It was such a blur because it was 24 hours a day. We never stopped. I mean,
you'd sleep where you could sleep. But we would run to, out to the deep water peer, pick up
ammunition powder. And that was so dangerous carrying that powder because one tracer into
the truck load powder and that truck was gone. Right. And it did happen. It just didn't
happen to me. But during Massachusetts Stryker, the enemy and the ash off valley were
making a resurgence. And this is after case on and after the Tetefense of it in play, they
were trying to recapture their stronghold of the ash off valley. Massachusetts Stryker was designed
to beat them back. So we, we hauled ammunition to these fire bases, Birmingham, Bastone,
Ande, Ronimo. And oftentimes they would fire the ammunition off the vehicles. I mean, they
break the bands on 175, 155, how it's hers and fire it right off the trucks. And it was pretty
spectacular. Right. And when you had to fire your, your weapon, that would light up and they'd
know where you are. So you didn't want to pull the trigger. You wouldn't pull the trigger.
M60 until you had to. Right. And once you did that, they definitely knew where you were.
The differences are traces of red and there's a green. So you knew, you knew when they were coming,
what you knew you were being shot at for sure. When you think about what you did and how often you
ran these convoys and how you ran them and how often you did meet resistance, you were never
wounded. You caught some shrapnel in the knee one time. Yeah, one time. And it was taken out, just
made it, took it out. Made it took it out. Never reported. So no purple heart. But you have to feel
very blessed and very fortunate that you came back without a wound. Yeah. I am. So many people didn't.
I know many people that were hurt badly and they know some that were killed. And there are some
that were killed that I don't know that were killed. So it was a bad time.
I want to talk about the nature of this convoy again. You were telling me the other day that
you were talking about route one and it runs the entire length of it all the way from the
Mekong Delta to the DMZ. And eventually you quit running sort of convoy style because that's when
you would get stopped and you'd run the trucks one at a time. And that would begin it way
going north toward Dong Ha. Because the VC wouldn't waste their, when waste on the truck. They were
less apt to try to stop one truck. Now they would shoot at you. Right. I mean you'd be driving on
route one and you'd see the machine gun bullets striking the rice paddy coming towards you.
And then they'd pass in front of you or hit your truck or you know but yeah, but you're just
running wide open as fast as that truck would go. Yeah, that's what I wanted to talk about because
sometimes these codboys would be up to 20 trucks. Yeah. Right. And it wouldn't be like a slow moving
codboy. Now we'd be flying. You wouldn't catch the one in front of you and the one behind you
wouldn't catch you. You'd be flying to get now from where you were from where you were to where you
were going as fast as as fast as you could roll it. Yeah. And sometimes that meant having to deal with
Vietnamese vehicles. They would have these buses loaded with ducks and geese and 300 people.
And they get in and it was always very dicey because you didn't want them to stop and you were
slowing you down. And if they tried to slow you down or it appeared they were trying to slow you
down then it would make you think you know that they're trying to set me up and there was there's
been more than one Lombard bus get pushed off road. Yeah. 70 miles an hour and I hope nobody got hurt
but right. That's what they did and that's what I did. And these weren't paved highways. These were
dirt roads. No. Route one was completely paved. Right. And if when you got off route one then you
begin to worry about mines because before on route one they couldn't mind if asphalt had
road and the areas when they would repair them in the mornings engineers would run minesweeps on
that section while they were repairing the road so you'd be safe on route one as long as you're on
that asphalt. So the asphalt valley was pretty it was it was pretty complete with mines. I mean
there once you once you passed into the asphalt valley you were definitely an enemy territory. I
asked you the other day were you afraid and tell me what your answer answer was you said you said
you were you you you you were afraid but you weren't terrified. I was afraid but I was not terrified. I
was young and you know I don't know I guess I had confidence that I'd been trained well enough to
do what I was supposed to do that I just was not terrified I was afraid I mean when when mortars
are falling around you a man would be a fool to say that he wasn't afraid yeah but I wasn't
terrified nor was I ever not able to think clearly or right. We talked about one time about
going to get some bread and the convoy took off without you yeah yeah that's all that story.
That was foolish of them or you. Me of me it was really crazy thing I did they
Vietnamese had these little carts and they made bread and we were in Hawaii waiting at a night
convoy and and of course I was hungry I don't know if you ever tried to live on seagrassians but
if you could get any kind of food real food so I saw this bread thing up the street and it was I
don't know not more than a block and I had a Fritz was his name he was a new guy in country and
he was he was driving the truck I said Fritz stay right here I'm gonna run up there and get some
that bread and he said oh don't do that better than I said yeah I'm gonna go so I took off. Well
I didn't get started good and I hear him take off I hear the truck's taken off so I ran to this
style and I got the bread and gave him some NPC I don't know how much whatever I gave him and ran
back well time I got back the trucks were going around the corner of maybe two or three block
stands when I run the corner well you don't just and we had a heavy load so you don't just start off
take off real fast so in a little bit we're flying and it's dark we can't see anything and you
know we're trying to look for these white triangles it'll be in front of us right because no lights
right we're flying this is fast if we can go and we pass the Catholic church I think you'll
throw a picture of that Catholic church we passed that Catholic church and it's just shortly after
you pass that as a bridge and the Vietnamese were protecting that bridge if you didn't guard the
bridge as they just blow them up so they had they had bunkers all around that bridge and they had
just pulled all the Constantine wire back across the road and we came around that corner and there's
all that Constantine wire and we hit it at about 70 miles an hour and drug Constantine wire
and it took me days to get all that wire out of the actual truck but we didn't stop you mentioned
the picture so let's go ahead and go to some photographs right now as a matter of fact because
we've got something to look at that from your collection the first picture is going to be of you
just very soon after there it is right there this is a pretty soon after you arrived
in country yeah I hadn't been there hadn't been there more than maybe a week or 10 days at most
you see I've got an M14 and it was pretty strange to get an M14 but that's what I was issued
but they shortly took those up and gave the same 16s this is an M60 yeah that's an M60 that's
that's our perimeter at food by looking toward the South China Sea I don't know why I took that
picture even if I did take that picture but at night time the direction that gun pointed was a
fearful place because you didn't know what was out there okay actually the rifle patrol that's
a Chinese shotgun bolt action 7.62 by 51 millimeter rifle with a bayonet it's not even a semi-automatic
I don't know where I found it I have no idea but I found it had plans to bring it home but
somebody got it or took it away from here maybe they I don't know what happened to it but you got
a picture of it I got a picture of it there you go there you go talk about this picture it's
pretty fascinating well you see a bridge there that's it I analyzed that's between quantery and
way and they blown up that bridge the North Vietnamese blew it up and so they're reconstructing it
the engineers are and the CBS and so our convoy would go into the river and drive that river and
that's not as deep as it got it would get up to where it would nearly be to the windows on those
trucks but the exhaust is up high enough that you could drive through there and you always had a
raft of kids around you they would disappear from everywhere just like they do in any war I think
sure and we'd feed them give them candy or whatever we could give them I had a group in
way that I took care of for my tour over there there always when I got a chance to get them something
special I got it okay this is a fantastic picture of a that's a fire base that's a marine firebase
called GLA and this is an outpost that I'm at up on top of this mountain and I'm on guard duty
because what I'm done up there I'm going up for guard duty and it's going to get night and
and our job is is to protect the men that are sleeping down there and and those hootches that you see
my hoot was directly behind me down below where I live like say I wasn't there but just a short
pan I kind of wish I could have stayed there because so this photograph is pretty soon after you
you arrived in country I hadn't been there very long I don't I didn't I'm we're going to see a
photograph true towards the end of your tour here in a minute but right here I think we have a
picture coming up of that's what time will it look like I don't know what we've got there but we've
got we're loaded down with something and and we're going somewhere but I don't even know where that
is I just wanted people to see an idea of what you know what we were talking about when we talked
about the cod boy with the five done trucks and then I think now there you are towards the end of
your tour and not a lot of meat on those bones you're on the left now it took me it took me a
a bit hard on me I lost a lot of weight we didn't eat very much or very often and what you got
with sea rations it wasn't a mess haul so and that's you and two other Texans right yes sir that's
Jerry Smith on the right Greg Mahoney in the middle and myself on the left there was another guy
of the four of us Texans in the same huge his his name was Goodrich and he was from college station
but he was killed there and I don't know that I even have a picture of him here's a picture coming
up of L. Z. Birmingham that's L. Z. Birmingham that's in the Ashaw Valley right most people think of
Vietnam as a jungle but in the Ashaw Valley it's it's mostly scrubbed type Chenry that's a lot
deeper than it looks I mean if you're looking at it it looks like that's not very deep but that
Chenry is 12 15 feet tall so it's pretty thick but but not as lush and green as most people would
think right and you mentioned the the church the Catholic church yeah that's the Catholic church
in Hawaii I thought it was a remarkable building there in Hawaii I don't know that it exists today
or not but it did then and I thought it was remarkable fascinating pictures you came back in
April of 1969 rank of E4 assigned to the Commanding General office General John J. Sutherland
and Fort Knox Kentucky and you you pride yourself as being one of the few people that have seen the
gold at Fort Knox right I don't know what percentage of Americans are how many if you said out of
one out of 10,000 or 100,000 but as a driver for Lieutenant General which three star general
when he went there of course had the opportunity to go in too right now so I've been in it twice
I've seen the gold I don't know how much gold there now but there was sure a lot of gold there
in 1969 that was a fascinating tour General Sutherland ask you where you wanted to go you didn't
want to go back to Vietnam Spain was your first choice he couldn't help you there but he sent you
to Holland and then eventually and the place you were in Holland was sort of a relay station type of
thing for communication communication for Vietnam right yeah it was it was a short wave radio
connection and it was all of course encrypted and I was assigned there and there were 23 Americans
at the Piong Cousern in Maustricht in the Netherlands right there for six months and then to a Baptist
retreat in Mannheim Germany where you were a chaplain's assistant talk about that duty well I had
gone well I had a Baptist retreat at Berchteskarten which is the Oberts Salzburg Hitler's retreat
and we went to the General Walker Hotel and Major Leroy A. Sysk chaplain was there and his
chaplain's assistant was going home and I just met him and we talked and he said would you
be interested in being a chaplain's assistant in Germany and I told him a word so I got orders
from transferred from Maustricht in the Netherlands to Mannheim Germany and was chaplain's assistant
which was probably the best duty that any soldier could ever have like you said people didn't
mess with the chaplain's assistant no they didn't they didn't you help soldiers along who'd
gotten dear John letters and such like that and and it was a it was a good humanitarian duty which
I know you liked very much you you got out of the army in January of 1971 you had really
sort of become the spiritual leader there after the chaplain had gone home you came back to Texas
to Stenat Texas in 1971 went back to school a little bit of time at Texas Tech then Howard
Payne got your teaching degree taught for two years but then you joined the telephone company
and you did that for 27 years that's right GTE and of course was never rising right but I
worked with them and had had a wonderful career work with a lot of great people with the phone
company and I have a lot of good friends and a lot of great memories of working with the phone
company right I want to spend the time that we have left about six and a half minutes or so here
talking about the American Legion because you are the proud commander of the American Legion the
Earl Graham post one fifty nine in Brian that serves all of the brasses Valley talk a little bit
about the Legion and the good work that it does I know one of the the programs that you all are
most proud of is a boy state and girl state boy state and girl state boy state and girl state
are magnificent programs of the American Legion this gives students the ability to go and function
as a government go and actually run for office in a fictitious city in a fictitious
county of a fictitious state and they run for a particular office now when they all get there
they don't know what office they want to run for you know what office it would be but everyone
has the opportunity to run for and be elected and this past year are two contestants from Brian
College Station not only one boy state but they were sent to nation boys nation in Washington DC
which there is only one from Texas only one from Texas they came from this post one five nine
six district and so we're pretty pretty happy about that the national represent additional
state of Texas indeed I know you said that you got involved with the American Legion just about
I guess quite in 2006 or 2007 and one of the reasons you got involved with the American Legion is
you wanted to be a part of the honor guard yeah it's something that the American Legion does and
serves for for people who have passed for veteran to have passed talk a little bit about the
honor guard for people that don't know what it does well the honor guards what what brought me to
the American Legion I believe that the service that you know I'm not speaking for myself I'm
speaking for the millions of others right that have served but when they leave this life I believe it's
all together fitting and proper that we do military honors and we do that regularly in the
Prattles Valley we do often two or three times a week and it's just the the process of the 21
guns salute taps and presenting that flag to the family right and so that they can place that
flag in a place of prominence in their home so that people that can come later and see that this
is a home that was led by a person that served his nation right and that's what that's what the
American Legion's really all about is Americanism exactly we're we're we're political but we're
not partisan right but that's the thing about the American Legion that I'm most proud of is it's
it's all about Americanism one thing that I know that you want to do and as a concern is that you
know none of us you I anybody we're not getting any younger or World War II veterans are in their
80s and 90s are Korean War veterans are in their 70s and and the Vietnam War veterans are getting
into 60 and above and so getting younger veterans involved in American Legion is something that
you're striving for and it's a it's a little bit of a challenge sometimes it is a challenge because
of the the generational difference between say the Vietnam veterans and desert storm there's a
long time in there and we're having to we're going to have to adapt American Legion VFW I'm also
a life member of the DAV right we're going to have to adapt to bring those veterans inside these
organizations so that they can represent the future generations that come you know I'd like to say
that we won't be involved in war in the future but that's not a fact of life right right exactly freedom
is not free and another thing that I know that you all do and and as the VFW and the DAV do is you
send packages overseas to understand monthly care packages or packages with anything that the
soldiers need right our our second commander Jerry Heights second vice commander Jerry Heights has
faithfully been involved in sending packages overseas we send packages over on a regular basis
and it's the kinds of things that soldiers need right the comfort items that they don't have
you know we got some of that in Vietnam not very much but I'm sure would have liked to
had it yes little things like Moissette Towel somebody sent me some of those one time and you can
imagine the comfort of washing your face off when you haven't washed your face in a week especially
in the conditions like you were in in Vietnam which the the men and women that are in Afghanistan
and I right right now are in right now so little something special to eat yeah some some just
anything that they can use we try to send the Irvran Post I know you all meet what the first
Thursday first Thursday of each month and if you're a veteran the browser of Ali we'd love to
have you come it we have a happy our social hour that begins at six o'clock and we eat at seven
program in our meeting regular meetings eight but we'd love any veteran browser to come
no matter what generation yeah wonderful facility out there and I know that you rent out the
facility two at times you have both indoor and a great outdoor patio with with grills and
cookouts and and all of that so it's a great facility that's over there in in Bryan and it's
available to public if they if they would like to to rent it indeed you and your wife Debbie are
very active in your retirement I know that I wish we had time to talk about the mission trips that
you all have taken to Germany but you're you remain active and but we're out of time and I just want
to thank you for your service not only in Vietnam but certainly now with being the commander of 159
well Tom I want to thank you for what you do for the veterans of Bryan and Ali it's always a pleasure
thank you thank you Gary he served the country that he loved in Vietnam and even though he left
active service in 1971 Gary Banta continues to serve today in his retirement he calls the American
Legion especially the Earl Graham post 159 unique and it is we salute him for his brave service in
Vietnam and his service today I'm Tom Turbjville join us next time on Veterans of the Valley
so